CTOR-1116 : Update EN version an add a french version for sc-datadog-metrics (#3834)
centreon/centreon-documentation: versioned_docs/version-24.10/integrations/data-analytics/sc-datadog-metrics.md

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

The Datadog Metrics stream connector allows you to send data from Centreon to Datadog.

## Before starting

- In most cases, you will want to send data from the central server. It is also possible to send it from a remote server or a poller 
(e.g. if you want to avoid the central server being a SPOF, or if you are an MSP and you install the stream connector on a poller or 
a remote server within your customer's infrastructure).
- By default, the Datadog Metrics stream connector sends **metrics** from [**host_status**](../../developer/developer-broker-mapping.md#host-status) 
and [**service_status**](../../developer/developer-broker-mapping.md#service-status) Broker events. These metrics are contained in the **perf_data** 
field of the events. The event format is shown **[here](#event-format)**.
- These events are sent each time a host or a service is checked. Various parameters let you [filter out events](#filtering-or-adapting-the-data-you-want-to-send-to-datadog).

> - Aformentioned events are fired each time a host or a service is checked. Various parameters let you filter out events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

</TabItem>

> <TabItem value="Debian 11 & 12" label="Debian_11_&_12">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<TabItem value="Debian 12" label="Debian 12">
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> ## Configuring your Datadog equipment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuring your Datadog server
```

> You may need to configure your Datadog equipment so that it can receive data from Centreon. Please refer to Datadog's documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may need to configure your Datadog server so that it can receive data from Centreon. Please refer to Datadog's documentation.
```

> Make sure Datadog is able to receive data sent by Centreon: flows must not be blocked by the configuration of Datadog or by a security equipment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure Datadog is able to receive data sent by Centreon: flows must not be blocked by the configuration of Datadog or by a security device.
```

2. Click on **central-broker-master** (or the appropriate broker configuration if it is a poller or a remote server that will send events).
3. On the **Output** tab, select **Generic - Stream connector** from the list and then click **Add**. A new output appears in the list.
4. Fill in the fields as follows:

| Field           | Value                                                    |
| --------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- |
| Name            | Datadog metrics                                          |
| Path            | /usr/share/centreon-broker/lua/datadog-metrics-apiv2.lua |
| Filter category | Neb                                                      |

5. To enable Centreon to connect to your Datadog equipment, fill in the following mandatory parameters. The fields for the first entry are already present. 
Click on the **+Add a new entry** link located below the **Filter category** table to add another one.

| Type   | Name         | Value explanation   | Value exemple                    |
| ------ |--------------|---------------------|----------------------------------|

> | string | api_key      | The datadog api key | OGwOM8nse3FHjxyGw5ODLWWXS1oEpcPs |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| string | api_key      | The datadog api key | xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx |
```

6. Fill in any optional parameters you want (using the **+Add a new entry** link):

| Type   | Name      | Value explanation                          | default value                                |
| ------ |-----------|--------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| string | logfile   | The file in which logs are written         | /var/log/centreon-broker/datadog-metrics.log |
| number | log_level | Logging level from 1 (errors) to 3 (debug) | 1                                            |

7. Use the stream connector's optional parameters to [filter or adapt the data you want Centreon to send to Datadog](#filtering-or-adapting-the-data-you-want-to-send-to-datadog).

8. [Deploy the configuration](../../monitoring/monitoring-servers/deploying-a-configuration.md).

9. Restart **centengine** on all pollers:

   ```shell
   systemctl restart centengine
   ```

>    Datadog should now receive data from Centreon. To test if it is working, see [Curl commands: testing the stream connector](#curl-commands-testing-the-stream-connector).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datadog should now receive data from Centreon. To test if it is working, see [Curl commands: testing the stream connector](#curl-commands-testing-the-stream-connector).
```

### Filtering or adapting the data you want to send to Datadog

> All stream connectors have a set of [optional parameters](https://github.com/centreon/centreon-stream-connector-scripts/blob/master/modules/docs/sc_param.md#default-parameters), that allow you to filter the data you will send to your Datadog device, to reformat the data, to define a proxy...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All stream connectors have a set of [optional parameters](https://github.com/centreon/centreon-stream-connector-scripts/blob/master/modules/docs/sc_param.md#default-parameters), that allow you to filter the data you will send to your Datadog server, to reformat the data, to define a proxy...
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Configuring your Datadog equipment

> You may need to configure your Datadog equipment so that it can receive data from Centreon. Please refer to the documentation of Datadog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may need to configure your Datadog equipment so that it can receive data from Centreon. Please refer to Datadog's documentation.
```

### Custom event format

This stream connector is not compatible with custom event format. You can't change the format of the event for metrics oriented stream connectors.

## Curl commands: testing the stream connector

### Sending events

If you want to test that events are sent to Datadog correctly:

1. Log in to the server that you configured to send events to Datadog (your central server, a remote server or a poller).
2. Run the following command:

```shell
curl -X POST -H "content-type: application/json" -H "DD-API-KEY: <api_key>" '<http_server_url><datadog_metric_endpoint>' -d '{"host":"my_host","metric":"database.used.percent","points":[[1630590530,80]],"tags":["service:my_service","instance:my_instance","subinstance:sub_1","subinstance:sub_2"]}'
```

> You must replace all the *`<xxxx>`* inside the above command with their appropriate value. *<http_server_url>* may become *https://api.datadoghq.com*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must replace all the *`<xxxx>`* inside the above command with the correct value. *<http_server_url>* may become *https://api.datadoghq.com*.
```
